================================================================================
                   AGENT RESEARCH UPDATE - RAW SOURCE ARCHIVE                   
================================================================================
ID:              RES-20260819-0004
TITLE:           Hidden Markov Models Applied To Intraday Momentum Trading With Side
TYPE:            FILE_PDF
SOURCE / URL:    FILE:Hidden Markov Models Applied To Intraday Momentum Trading With Side Information.pdf
INGESTION TIME:  2026-08-19 16:18:38
WORD COUNT:      16,957 words
CHARACTER COUNT: 103,641 characters
EXTRACTION:      Multimodal In-line Fusion (PDF + Chart OCR + Video Transcript)
BYPASS STATUS:   Direct (Not Encrypted)
================================================================================
RAW EXTRACTED DATA STREAM BELOW (FULL FIDELITY PRESERVATION):
================================================================================

--- [Page 1 / 23] --- Hidden Markov Models Applied To Intraday Momentum Trading With Side Information Hugh Christensena,∗, Richard Turnerb, Simon Godsilla aSignal Processing and Communications Laboratory, Engineering Department, Cambridge University, CB2 1PZ, UK bMachine Learning Group, Engineering Department, Cambridge University, CB2 1PZ, UK Abstract A Hidden Markov Model for intraday momentum trading is presented which speciﬁes a latent momentum state re- sponsible for generating the observed securities’ noisy returns. Existing momentum trading models suﬀer from time- lagging caused by the delayed frequency response of digital ﬁlters. Time-lagging results in a momentum signal of the wrong sign, when the market changes trend direction. A key feature of this state space formulation, is no such lagging occurs, allowing for accurate shifts in signal sign at market change points. The number of latent states in the model is estimated using three techniques, cross validation, penalized likelihood criteria and simulation based model selection for the marginal likelihood. All three techniques suggest either 2 or 3 hidden states. Model parameters are then found using Baum-Welch and Markov Chain Monte Carlo, whilst assuming a single (discretized) univariate Gaussian distribution for the emission matrix. Often a momentum trader will want to condition their trading signals on additional information. To reﬂect this, learning is also carried out in the presence of side information. Two sets of side information are considered, namely a ratio of realized volatilities and intraday seasonality. It is shown that splines can be used to capture statistically signiﬁcant relationships from this information, allowing returns to be predicted. An Input Output Hidden Markov Model is used to incorporate these univariate predictive signals into the transition matrix, presenting a possible solution for dealing with the signal combination problem. Bayesian inference is then carried out to predict the securities t + 1 return using the forward algorithm. The model is simulated on one year’s worth of e-mini S&P500 futures data at one minute sampling frequency, and it is shown that pre-cost the models have a Sharpe ratio in excess of 2.0. Simple modiﬁcations to the current framework allow for a fully non-parametric model with asynchronous prediction. Keywords: Bayesian inference, trend following, high frequency futures trading, quantitative ﬁnance. 1. Introduction An intraday momentum trading strategy is presented, consisting of a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) frame- work that has the ability to use side information from external predictors. The proposed framework is quite general and allows any predictors to be used in conjunc- tion with the momentum model. An appealing aspect of this model is that all the computationally demand- ing learning is done oﬀ-line, allowing for a fast infer- ence phase meaning the model can be applied to high- frequency ﬁnancial data. ∗Corresponding author. Email addresses: hlc54@cam.ac.uk (Hugh Christensen), ret26@cam.ac.uk (Richard Turner), sjg30@cam.ac.uk (Simon Godsill) Quantitative trading, namely the application of the scientiﬁc method, is now well established in the ﬁnan- cial markets. A sub-section of this ﬁeld is termed al- gorithmic trading, where algorithms are responsible for the full trade cycle, including the decision of when to buy and sell. When this process is dependent on the prior behavior of the security, it historically was termed technical analysis (Lo et al., 2000). Momentum trad- ing (or trend following) falls into this category and is the most popular hedge fund style trading strategy cur- rently used. For example, the largest quantitative hedge funds by assets under management famously trade mo- mentum strategies (Anon, 2011). It can be inferred from this that momentum is the most signiﬁcant exploitable eﬀect in the ﬁnancial markets, and as a result of this there is a large body of literature published on the ef- fect (Hong and Stein, 1999). Momentum (or trend) can Preprint submitted to arXiv June 22, 2020 arXiv:2006.08307v1 [q-fin.TR] 15 Jun 2020 --- [Page 2 / 23] --- be deﬁned as the rate of change of price. As a strat- egy, momentum trading aims to forecast future security returns by exploiting the positive autocorrelation struc- ture of the data. Once a trend is detected by careful es- timation of the mean return (in the presence of noise), it can be predicted. The most well known trend-following system is that introduced by Gerald Appel in the 1970’s, the moving-average convergence-divergence (MACD) (Gerald, 1999), made famous by the success of a group of traders named the “turtles” (Faith, 2007). The MACD strategy uses the diﬀerence between a pair of cascaded low pass ﬁlters in parallel to remove noise while es- timating the true mean of the rate of change of price (Satchell and Acar, 2002). The reasons for the mo- mentum eﬀect existing are less than clear despite ex- tensive academic research on the subject. Financial data consists of deterministic and stochastic components and both of these components can exhibit trends. Signiﬁ- cant trends commonly occur even in data which is gen- erated by a random process, such as geometric Brow- nian motion (Wilmott, 2006) and can be explained by the e ﬀect of summing random disturbances (Lo and MacKinlay, 2001). Attempting to model such stochas- tic trends can lead to spurious results. Deterministic reasons for trends existing are thought to include herd- ing behaviour (Shiller, 2005), supply-and-demand argu- ments (Johnson, 2002) and delayed over-reactions that are eventually reversed (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1999). While there is debate in the academic literature between those that believe the momentum e ﬀect is still viable post-transaction costs, for example (Jegadeesh and Tit- man, 1999), and those that believe the e ﬀect has been arbitraged away, for example (Lesmond et al., 2004), the continued proﬁtability of large momentum trading hedge funds is testament to the enduring nature of the momentum eﬀect. The motivation for this paper is to apply HMM’s to produce a trading algorithm that exploits the momentum eﬀect, and that can be applied to the ﬁnancial markets in real-time by industry practitioners. The core aim of the paper is to give the algorithm the best predictive perfor- mance possible, irrespective of methodology. Applica- tion of such work to the ﬁnancial markets has obvious economic beneﬁts. The two main innovations presented in this paper are both new and novel applications of existing statistical techniques to an applied problem. No new methodolo- gies are introduced in the paper. Firstly, the price dis- covery process of a security is described by a trend term in the presence of noise. This process is ﬁtted into an HMM framework and various means of parameter esti- mation are inspected. Secondly, momentum traders of- ten want to incorporate other information into their mo- mentum based forecast, the signal combination prob- lem, and an IOHMM framework is established to al- low this. For both innovations, realistic experiments are conducted (including transaction costs and slippage), results presented and conclusions drawn. This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 HMM’s in ﬁnance and economics are reviewed and the HMM framework is introduced. In Section 3 the three learning methodologies are presented. In Section 4 two extrinsic predictors are developed and tested, and then in Section 5 learning is carried out using this side in- formation. In Section 6 our inference algorithm is pre- sented. In Section 7 we present the historical futures data and then simulate the performance of the models with data and present results. Finally in Section 8 con- clusions are presented, along with suggestions for fur- ther work. 2. Hidden Markov Models An HMM is a Bayesian state space model that as- sumes discrete time unobserved (hidden or latent) states (Gales and Young, 2008). The basic assumptions of a Markov state space model are ﬁrstly that states are con- ditionally independent of all other states given the pre- vious state, and secondly that observations are condi- tionally independent of all other observations given the state that generated it. 2.1. Literature Review of HMM in Finance and Eco- nomics In the 1970’s Leonard Baum was one of the ﬁrst re- searchers to work with what is now known as an HMM. He applied the methodology to securities’ trading for the hedge fund Renaissance Technologies (Baum et al., 1970; Teitelbaum, 2008). Since then HMMs have been used extensively in ﬁnance and economics (Bhar and Hamori, 2004; Mamon and Elliott, 2007). The ﬁrst widely attributed public application of HMM’s to ﬁ- nance and economics was by James Hamilton in 1989 (Hamilton, 1989). In his seminal paper, Hamilton views the parameters of an autoregression as the outcome of a discrete Markov process, where the observed variable is GNP and the latent variable is the business cycle. By observing GNP, the position in the business cycle can be estimated and future activity predicted. Following Hamilton’s paper there has been much Bayesian work discussing estimation of these mod- els and providing ﬁnancial and economic applications, most of which focus on Markov chain Monte Carlo 2 --- [Page 3 / 23] --- (MCMC). MCMC is a means of providing a numerical approximation to the posterior distribution using a set of samples, allowing approximate posterior probabilities and marginal likelihoods to be found. Two excellent re- views of the ﬁeld of Bayesian estimation using MCMC are given by Chib (Chib, 2001) and Scott (Scott, 2002). Noteworthy papers applying Bayesian estimation tech- niques include; Fruhwirth-Schnatter applies MCMC to a clustering problem from a panel data set of US bank lending data, where model parameters are time- varying (Frühwirth-Schnatter, 2001). Shephard applies the Metropolis algorithm to a non-Gaussian state space time series model and illustrates the technique by sea- sonally adjusting a money supply time series (Shep- hard, 1994). McCulloch et al apply a Gibbs sampler for parameter estimation in their Markov switching model and illustrate their technique using the growth rates of GNP (McCulloch and Tsay, 1994). Meligkotsidou et al tackle interest rate forecasting with an non-constant transition matrix using an MCMC reversible jump algo- rithm for predictive inference (Meligkotsidou and Del- laportas, 2011). Less commonly applied in the eco- nomic and ﬁnancial literature is the technique of vari- ational Bayes (VB) (Attias, 1999). VB provides a para- metric approximation to the posterior, often using in- dependence assumptions, in a computationally eﬃcient manner. McGrory et al apply VB to estimate the num- ber of unknown states along with the model parameters from the daily returns of the S&P500 (McGrory and Tit- terington, 2009). Finally, the debate between learning in HMM’s using frequentist methods such as expecta- tion maximization (EM), versus Bayesian methods such as MCMC is reviewed by Ryden who highlights poor mixing and long computation times as potential compu- tational disadvantages of MCMC (Rydén, 2008). Many diﬀerent extensions and modiﬁcations to the “vanilla” HMM have been proposed, and applied to eco- nomics and ﬁnance. Input output HMMs (IOHMM) include inputs and outputs and can be viewed as a di- rected version of a Hidden Random Field (Bengio and Frasconi, 1995; Kakade et al., 2002). Unlike HMMs, the output and transition distributions are not only con- ditioned on the current state, but are also conditioned on an observed input value. Bengio et al carry out learning in an IOHMM using a feed-forward neural net- work. Kim et al use an IOHMM to model stock order ﬂows in the presence of two hidden market states (Kim et al., 2002). HMMs are a generalization of a mixture model where latent variables control the mixture com- ponent to be selected for each observation. In a mix- ture model, the latents are assumed to be i.i.d. random variables, as opposed to being related through a Markov process as in an HMM (Bishop, 2006). Liesenfeld et al apply a bivariate mixture model to stock price and trading volume (Liesenfeld, 2001). In their model, the behavior of volatility and volume results from the si- multaneous interaction of the number of information ar- rivals and traders’ sensitivity to new information, both of which are treated as latent variables. In an hierar- chical HMM (HHMM), each state is itself an HHMM, allowing modelling of “the complex multi-scale struc- ture which appears in many natural sequences” (Fine et al., 1998). Wisebourt et al generate a measure of the limit order book imbalance and uses it to drive latent market regimes inside an HHMM (Wisebourt, 2011). Poisson HMMs (PHMM) are a special case of HMMs where a Poisson process has a rate which varies in as- sociation with changes between the di ﬀerent states of a Markov model (Scott, 2002). Branger et al apply a PHMM to model jumps in asset price in order to help in- form contagion risk and portfolio choice (Branger et al., 2012). Hidden semi-Markov models (HSMM) have the same structure as a HMM except that the unobservable process is semi-Markov rather than Markov. Here the probability of a change in the hidden state depends on the amount of time that has elapsed since entry into the current state (Yu, 2010). Bulla et al apply a HSMM to daily security returns in order to capture the slow de- cay in the autocorrelation function of the squared re- turns, which HMMs fail to capture (Bulla and Bulla, 2006). Finally, factorial HMMs (FHMM) distribute the latent state into multiple state variables in a dis- tributed manner, allowing a single observation to be conditioned on the corresponding latent variables of a set of independent Markov chains, rather than a single Markov chain (Ghahramani and Jordan, 1997). Charlot applies an FHMM to design a new multivariate GARCH model with time varying conditional correlation (Char- lot, 2012). Applications of HMMs in ﬁnance and economics range extensively, with latent variables including the business cycle (Grégoir and Lenglart, 2000), inter- equity market correlation (Bhar and Hamori, 2003), bond-credit risk spreads (Thomas et al., 2002), inﬂation (Kim, 1993; Chopin and Pelgrin, 2004), credit risk (Gi- ampieri et al., 2005), options pricing (Buﬃngton and El- liott, 2002), portfolio allocation (Elliott and Hinz, 2002; Roman et al., 2010), volatility (Rossi and Gallo, 2006; Dueker, 1997), interest rates (Elliott and Wilson, 2007; Ang and Bekaert, 2002), trend states (Dai et al., 2010; Pidan and El-yaniv, 2011) and future asset returns (Shi and Weigend, 1997; Hassan and Nath, 2005; Dueker and Neely, 2007). This paper relates to the broader ﬁeld of research into 3 --- [Page 4 / 23] --- the prediction of security returns by exploiting the mo- mentum e ﬀect. To our knowledge, no other authors have considered momentum as a latent variable in a HMM setting. However Christensen et al have consid- ered a latent momentum formulation in a Bayesian ﬁl- tering setting (Christensen et al., 2012). In this paper the authors track a continuous latent momentum state of a time series using a Rao-Blackwellized particle ﬁl- ter. The paper ﬁnds that the predictions are statistically signiﬁcant when applied to a portfolio of futures in the presence of transaction costs. In general terms it is ex- pected that an HMM would be able to outperform the Rao-Blackwellized particle ﬁltering formulation. This is because an HMM with lots of states can model arbi- trary transitions between trend states, e.g. a sudden re- versal of trend at the top of the market, whereas a linear Gaussian model is limited to linear changes. 2.2. An HMM for Trading Momentum Our model is based on the concept of a noisy trend, where the trend is a latent state and the price series is Brownian with a stochastic drift. In order to forecast the next time step in the HMM we begin with a distri- bution over the current hidden state and use the transi- tion function to propagate this distribution forward in time. At the next time step we are able to infer the most likely hidden state and generate a predictive dis- tribution over observables. This is done by taking a weighted average of the conditional distribution of the observations where the weights are from the distribu- tion over the hidden state. We are not interested in predicting price, an arbitrary value, rather the change in price or the return. Let yt be the price, such that Y ={y1,..., yT} and ∆yt = log yt/yt−1 be the return, such that ∆Y ={∆y2,..., ∆yT}. In our model ∆yt (the obser- vation) is inﬂuenced by a hidden, unobserved state, mt (the trend, where d∆y/dt is a noisy estimate of mt), such that M ={m1,..., mT}. In order to ﬁnd E(∆yt|∆y1:t−1), a two step process of learning followed by inference is carried out. This model is shown in Figure 1. The intuition behind the model is that security returns can be modelled as a noisy trend process and that while return can be observed, the trend state cannot be and must be inferred. While the MACD algorithm of Sec- tion 1 attempts to ﬁnd the true value of this hidden state empirically by use of a digital ﬁlter, in this paper we model the observations and the hidden trend state ex- plicitly, therefore allowing interpretation of all the pa- rameters in a meaningful way. An additional advantage of an HMM formulation over MACD is that HMMs are able to track trends in a much more ﬂexible way, by en- coding non-linear relationships between the states. This 2 y3 3 y2 1 y1 p state prior observation function state transition function observation state m m m m A Figure 1: A state space model for a discretized continuous observed state ∆y (the change in price) and a discrete hidden state m (the trend). The relationship between the latent vari- ables and the system parameters is shown. allows for sudden changes to a new trend, whereas dig- ital ﬁlters inevitably have some delay in response de- pending upon their frequency response. Finally, we note that digital smoothing ﬁlters can often be written equivalently as the stationary solution of particular lin- ear state-space models (Harvey, 1991). Time series, such as security returns, can be syn- chronous or asynchronous. A synchronous time series is one where the time stamps lie on a regular grid. The grid spacing is referred to as the sampling frequency. An asynchronous time series is one where the time stamps do not lie on a regular grid. Raw security returns are generally asynchronous, but are often sampled to make them synchronous. Security returns are not continuous in value, but lie on a discrete price grid, with a grid spac- ing deﬁned on a security speciﬁc basis by the exchange. This grid spacing is called the tick size, α. The state space of the latent states consists of a total of K possi- ble values of trend. An upper limit toK can be found by knowing the grid size and calculating Ω = max (|∆Y|). The latent variables are indexed on this grid as, mt ∈ {1,..., k,..., K} (1) where k refers to the kth latent state. By ﬁxing K the set of time-dependent trend terms can be speciﬁed by M. The observations depend on the latent states accord- ing to; return at time t is equal to the trend term, plus Gaussian noise, ∆yt =µmt +ϵt ϵt∼ Norm(0,σ 2 mt) (2) Given the indexed grid of Equation (1), one mode of initialization would be µ1:K = {−Ω,−(Ω−α),−(Ω− 2α),..., 0,..., (Ω− 2α), (Ω−α), Ω}. The Gaussian assumption of Equation (2) could be replaced with any other parametric distribution (for ex- ample, fat-tailed Cauchy) or a non-parametric approach 4 --- [Page 5 / 23] --- (for example, kernel density estimation). The resulting conditional distribution from Equation (2) is, p(∆yt|mt) = Norm(∆yt;µmt,σ 2 mt) As the latents lie on a discrete grid, yet the noise model is continuous, the implementation is required to dis- cretize the Gaussian noise variable to ensure the results lie on the grid. The joint distribution of this state space model is therefore given by, p(∆Y, M) = p(m1)  T∏ t=2 p(mt|mt−1)  T∏ t=1 p(∆yt|mt) Given the HMM and the observationsp(∆Y, M) one can deduce information about the states occupied by the un- derlying Markov chain m1:T . What we are interested in ﬁnding in this model is the probability of a trend given all our observations of price up to now, p(mt|∆y1:t), also known as the ﬁltering distribution. 2.3. Model Parameters Our model requires that the transition matrix A, emission matrix φ and latent node initial value π1 are known a-priori. Together these form the parameters of our model Θ = {A,π, φ}, as shown in Figure 1. Finding Θ constitutes the learning phase of the HMM. This batch approach to learning suits the structure of the ﬁnancial markets, as parameter estimation can be done using the previous H days of market data, when the market is shut. Before discussing learning, the connection between the hidden states M and the model parameters Θ is explained. A speciﬁes the probability of transitions between the latent states, π is the probability of the initial latent state and φ is the probability of the observed return occurring. The connection between parameter φ and Equation (2) is that φ(∆yt) follows a Gaussian distribution. In this paper four di ﬀerent oﬀ-line learning approaches are considered, 1. Θ is learnt using piecewise linear regression (PLR). 2. Θ is learnt using the Baum-Welch algorithm. 3. Θ is learnt using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). 4. Θ is learnt using the Baum-Welch algorithm in the presence of side information. PLR and Baum-Welch are both frequentist methods, while MCMC is a Bayesian method. The inference phase of this paper is purely Bayesian. At this point we consider the correctness of combining frequentist and Bayesian methods in the same model. The core aim of this paper is to produce the best predictive performance possible, irrespective of methodology used and so from a philosophical viewpoint we are agnostic. From a prac- tical point of view, frequentist methods are more com- monly found in the trading industry. It is reasoned this is due to the relative simplicity of the methods, the par- simony of the models and the associated low compu- tational loads. In particular, trading practitioners tend to dislike complex models due to the risks associated with model failure being low-probability, high-impact. These risks are easier to understand and monitor in sim- ple models. The major issue when learning is the transient nature of the latent state and how stable its estimated means are. In order to ensure the most accurate estimation possible, the means of the K Gaussian distributions (the trends) are eﬃciently estimated using short windows of data. This is implemented using a rolling window of data that consists of 23 trading days (one month). This window size approximately agrees with the lowest fre- quency information we are trying to exploit in our sys- tem. The mixing of frequentist learning with Bayesian in- ference is a well established approach in the literature, for example Andrieu et al estimate static parameters in non-linear non-Gaussian state space models using EM type algorithms (Andrieu and Doucet, 2003). Other ex- amples of merging frequentist and Bayesian method- ologies are given by Gelman (Gelman, 2011) and Jor- dan (Jordan, 2009) who suggest using Bayesian in- ference coupled with frequentist model-checking tech- niques. Such an approach gives the performance ben- eﬁts of using a Bayesian prior, while allowing for the easily checkable assumptions given by frequentist con- ﬁdence intervals. Completely integrated Bayesian tech- niques to our problem do exist, such as particle MCMC which allows for fully Bayesian learning and inference, however such techniques suﬀer from unpractically high computational complexity (Andrieu et al., 2010). 2.3.1. State Transition Matrix A conditional distribution for the latent variables p(mt|mt−1) is speciﬁed. Because the latent variables can take one of K values, this distribution is the transition matrix A, size (K× K). The transition probabilities are given by, A = a1,1 a1,2 ... a1,K a2,1 a2,2 ... a2,K ... ... ... ... aK′,1 aK′,2 ... aK′,K 5 --- [Page 6 / 23] --- where ak′,k = p(mt = Mk|mt−1 = Mk′ ) k ′ , k = 1,..., K i.e. the probability of making a particular transition from state k ′ to state k in one time step is given by ak′,k. The diagonal corresponds to the probability of the sys- tem staying in its current state, while the lower diagonal corresponds to the system moving to a negative price trend and the upper diagonal corresponds to moving to a positive price trend. A has K(K− 1) independent pa- rameters and each row of A is a probability distribution function such that ∑ k ak′ k = 1. 2.3.2. Emission Matrix The probability of an observation given the hidden state is given by the emission matrix φ. This matrix is a set of parameters governing the conditional distribution of the observed variables p(∆Y|M, φ) = φk(∆y). In a discrete HMM model, an emission matrix is output of size the number of states in the hidden representation by the number of possible output states. For our continuous model each one of the K states has an associated output distribution of a single univariate discretized Gaussian, with a meanµk and a varianceσ2 k, as given by Equation (3). φk(∆y) ∝ Norm(∆y;µk,σ 2 k) = Norm(∆y;µk,σ 2 k) ∑ ∆y∈Y Norm(∆y;µk,σ 2 k) (3) whereY denotes the set of all possible ∆y. 2.3.3. Initial Latent Node The initial latent node m1 is special in that it does not have a parent node and so it has a marginal distribution p(m1) represented by a vector of probabilities π with elementsπk≡ p(m1 = k). 2.3.4. Number of Unknown States As the number of latent momentum states K is un- known, estimating K is a model selection problem. There are various methodologies for determining K, both heuristic and formal, frequentist and Bayesian. We summarize some of these techniques here, • Cross validation (Kohavi et al., 1995). Segment the data set into training and test portions. Select K which gives the best predictive performance on the training data set and then apply it to the test data set. • Generalized likelihood ratio tests (Vuong, 1989). The ratio of two model’s likelihoods is used to compute a p-value, which allows the null hypothe- sis to be accepted or rejected. • Penalized likelihood criteria, such as Bayesian in- formation criterion (BIC) (Schwarz, 1978) and Akaike information criterion (AIC) (Akaike, 1974). These criteria penalize the maximized like- lihood function by the number of model parame- ters. The disadvantage, is that they do not provide any measure of conﬁdence in the selected model. • Approximate Bayesian computation (Toni et al., 2009). Simulation based model selection. • Bayesian model comparison (Kass and Raftery, 1995). Theoretically powerful, but di ﬃcult to ap- ply in practice. This approach is often approxi- mated by MCMC (Gilks et al., 1996). The posterior probability p(Mk|∆Y, Θ) of a modelMk given data ∆Y is given by Bayes theorem, p(Mk|∆Y, Θ) = p(∆Y|Mk, Θ)p(Mk) p(∆Y) For two di ﬀerent models M1,M2 with parameters Θ1, Θ2, the Bayes factor B can be used to carry out model selection, B = p(∆Y|M1) p(∆Y|M2) = ∫ ∫ The chosen model is simply the model with the highest integrated likelihood p(Mk|∆Y, Θ). However, at times the prior p(Θ|Mk) is unknown and so the logarithm of the integrated likelihood can be approximated by the BIC. More accurate selection of K requires evaluating the marginal likelihood ∫ however this is an extremely di ﬃcult integral to calcu- late. Dealing with this integral is covered in Section 3.3 once MCMC has been introduced. In the following Section, each method of learning uses one of the above techniques to estimate K. 3. Learning Phase The three independent methods of learningΘ are now presented. Results are shown for applying the methods to one year’s worth of data at one minute sampling fre- quency from the ES future, a traded security. Full de- tails of the dataset and and its processing are described in Section 7. 3.1. Piecewise Linear Regression The “default case” is presented as a baseline against which other methods of learning can be compared. A is initialized as, ak′,k =  β, k ′ = k 1−β/K−1, k ′ , k 6 --- [Page 7 / 23] --- whereβ is the probability of the state staying in its cur- rent state and is set asβ = 0.5. The 1−β/K−1 term reﬂects that fact that in the absence of conditioning informa- tion, no state is more likely than any other state, though it is most likely to stay in its current state and thus is described as “sticky”. Change points P in the price Y represent breaks be- tween latent momentum states (i.e. trends). Using piecewise linear regression (PLR) on the training data set, P is found (Oh, 2011). PLR gives two things - ﬁrstly a state sequence which can be used in learning later and secondly, the model meanµk and varianceσ2 k. PLR is simply ordinary least squares carried out over segmented data, with change points tested for by t-stats. For each segment of data that contains a trend,µk is the gradient of the regression and σ2 k the variance, found from the maximum likelihood estimate for a Gaussian noise model, σ = √∑T t=1ϵ2 t T where ϵ are the regression residuals. The presence of autocorrelation would suggest that PLR was not work- ing correctly and so is checked for using the Durbin- Watson test (Durbin and Watson, 1971). Finally, it is noted that many other approaches exist for change point detection, for example (Adams and MacKay, 2007; Punskaya et al., 2002). For the default case, the number of hidden states is found using cross validation and is set to K = 2. 3.2. Baum-Welch The Baum-Welch algorithm is a special case of the EM algorithm which can be used to determine parame- ter estimates in an HMM when the state sequence of the latents is unknown (Baum et al., 1970). The algorithm attempts to ﬁnd the sequence of latent states M which will maximize the likelihood of having generated ∆Y given Θ, ˆΘ = argmax Θ p(∆Y|Θ) Finding this global maximum is intractable as it requires enumerating over all parameter values Θk and then cal- culating p(∆Y|Θk) for each k. Baum-Welch avoids this global maximum and instead settles for a local maxi- mum. As with other members of the EM class, this is achieved by computing the expected log-likelihood of the data under the current parameters and then using this to iteratively re-estimate the parameters until con- vergence. In the ﬁrst step of the algorithm (the E-step), Baum- Welch uses the forward-backward algorithm, which ﬁnds the smoothing distribution p(k|∆y1:T ). The For- ward algorithm givesαt(k), which is the probability that the model is in state k at time t, based on the current pa- rameters. The Backward algorithm gives βt+1(k) which is the probability of emitting the rest of the sequence if we are in state k at time t + 1, based on the current parameters. For large numbers of observations, numeri- cal under-ﬂow can occur, hence in implementation log- probabilities are used (Kingsbury and Rayner, 1971). The second step of the algorithm (the M-step), sees successive iterations of the algorithm update Θ improv- ing the likelihood up to some local maximum. This is done by calculating the occupation probabilities γt(k) which is the probability of the model occupying state k at time t. These probabilities are then used to ﬁnd the maximum likelihood estimates of A and φ (Juang et al., 1986). Baum-Welch is used to ﬁndK by maximizing the log- likelihood of k = 1,..., 50 models. Penalized likeli- hood criteria are calculated for each model and the max- imum value K = 3 selected. The results are shown in Figure 2. Baum-Welch requires estimates for initial value of the 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 8.5 8.6 8.7 8.8 8.9 9 9.1 9.2 9.3 x 10 4 Penalized Likelihood Criteria Hidden State K Statistic AIC BIC Maxima Figure 2: Penalized likelihood criteria. Finding the number of hidden states using Baum-Welch. The optimal model of K = 3 is shown by a red dot. emission and transition matrices. A “ﬂat start model” is deﬁned by setting all the values of A to be equal and φ to the global mean/variance of the data. The problem with this approach is that, depending on how the ini- tial HMM parameters are chosen, the local maximum to 7 --- [Page 8 / 23] --- which Baum-Welch converges to may not be the global maximum. Convergence is deemed to have occurred when either a certain number of iterations have passed or a certain log-likelihood tolerance has been met. In order to hit the global maximum, good initialization is crucial. To avoid local minima, a prior is set over Θ using training data Z. Applying Baum-Welch to Z it is noted that the square root of the model variances σ2 k is of the same order of magnitude as the tick-size α for the ES contract. This is as expected as the algorithm is unable to predict with an accuracy smaller than the grid size. Learning the covariance structure (untied) can re- sult in a implementation issue that for one or more states the local maxima might settle on a small number of data points, givingσ2 k→ 0, preventing the log-likelihood in- creasing at each iteration of the M-Step. This is dealt with in our implementation by never allowing the vari- ance to decrease below a fraction of the tick-size, α2 /2. The Baum-Welch algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. The notation of k to refers to a particular state and not the indicator variable mt, as that is path-dependent. 3.3. Markov Chain Monte Carlo MCMC methods are a class of algorithms for sam- pling from probability distributions based on construct- ing a Markov chain that has the desired distribution as its equilibrium distribution. By constructing Markov chains for sampling speciﬁc densities, marginal den- sities, posterior expectations and evidence can be cal- culated. The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (MHA) is a simple and widely applicable MCMC algorithm that uses proposal distributions to explore the target distri- bution (Metropolis et al., 1953). MHA constructs a Markov chain by proposing a value for Θ from the pro- posal distribution, and then either accepting or rejecting this value (with a certain probability). Given the well established literature on MHA in the ﬁnancial ﬁeld, the reader is referred to the review at (Chib, 2001). In order to ﬁnd the unknown number of states in a Bayesian framework, a prior distribution is placed on modelMk and then posterior distribution ofMk is esti- mated given data ∆Y, p(Mk|∆Y)∝ p(∆Y|Mk)× p(Mk) where p(Mk) is the prior, p(Mk|∆Y) is the posterior and the quantity we wish to estimate is the marginalized likelihood p(∆Y|Mk). However, as marginal likelihood integration is intractable, simulation based approaches must be used. There are many ways to approximate this marginal likelihood using MCMC draws, typically done using MHA for eachMk separately. However, all Alg. 1 HMM Baum-Welch. ˆΘ = BW(Z, K) 1: Initialize 2: Θ{A, φ} = extract(Z) {Extract initial parameters from the estimate} 3: while q< maxIterations do 4: Go around loop until parameters converge or tol is met 5: Forward Pass 6: α1(k) = p(m1)p(z1|m1) {Initialization} 7: for t = 2 to T do 8: αt(k) = ∑ mt−1 {Gen- erate a forwards factor by eliminating mt−1} 9: end for 10: Backward Pass 11: βt(k) = 1 {Initialization} 12: for t = T− 1 to 1 do 13: βt(k) = ∑ mt+1 {Generate a backwards factor by eliminating mt+1} 14: end for 15: Occupation Probabilities 16: γt(k) = αt(k)βt(k) p(zt) 17: Parameter Estimation 18: µ(k) = ∑T t=1γt(k)zt ∑T t=1γt(k) 19: σ2(k) = ∑T ∑T t=1γt(k) {Marginalizing over k gives “tied”σ2} 20: φ∼ Norm ( Z;µk,σ 2 k ) 21: A = 1 p(z) ∑T ∑T t=1γt(k) 22: score = p(Z|A, φ) 23: Terminate 24: if score < tol then 25: ˆΘ ={A, φ} {Maximum likelihood estimates} 26: return( ˆΘ) 27: end if 28: end while 8 --- [Page 9 / 23] --- known estimators have been shown to be biased (Robert and Marin, 2008). Another technique from the literature is reversible-jump MCMC (RJMCMC), however this is highly computationally intensive (Green, 1995). Based on the lower run-time, K is estimated using marginal likelihoods. To avoid a biased estimator, this is done using a simulation based approximation of the marginal likelihood called bridge sampling (Frühwirth-Schnatter, 2006). Bridge sampling takes an i.i.d. sample from an importance density and combines it with the MCMC draws from the posterior density in an appropriate way. With bridge sampling, p(∆Y|Mk) is approximated by, ˆp(∆Y|Mk) = L−1 ∑L N−1 ∑N where p∗(θ|∆Y,Mk) = p(∆Y|θ,Mk)× p(θ|Mk), and is the unnormalised posterior density of θ on Θk, κ is an arbitrary function on Θk, q is an arbitrary proba- bility density on Θk, ˘θ[n;k] are samples from the pos- terior p(θ|∆Y,Mk) obtained using MHA and ˜θ[l;k] are i.i.d. samples from q (Rydén, 2008). A drawback to the bridge-sampling approach is that if the number of hidden states is suspected to be larger than about six, then empirically the technique becomes inaccurate and a trans-dimensional approach such as RJMCMC has to be used. This is because it is essential that all modes of the posterior density are covered by the importance density q(θ), to avoid any instability in the estimators (Frühwirth-Schnatter, 2006). A literature review was conducted on the estimation of the number of hidden states in S&P500 daily return data. Assorted techniques including VB, RJMCMC, EM, penalized likelihood criteria and bridge-sampling all estimated the data to contain between 2 and 3 hid- den states (McGrory and Titterington, 2009; Robert et al., 2000; Rydén et al., 1998; Frühwirth-Schnatter, 2008; Rydén, 2008). As a result of this we believe that K ≤ 10, while noting our data sampling frequency is signiﬁcantly di ﬀerent from that used in the literature (one minute versus daily). In order to ﬁnd K, a se- ries of mixture distributions of a univariate normal are speciﬁed. For each of k = 1,..., 10 models the log of the bridge sampling estimator of the marginal likelihood ˆp(∆Y|Mk) is found. The results are shown in Figure 3. It can be seen that the largest marginal likelihood is a mixture of three normal distributions, meaning K = 3 is the number of hidden states suggested by MCMC. Using this number of hidden states, Θ is found. The choice of prior is a critical step in the MCMC pro- cess and can lead to signiﬁcant variations in the pos- terior probabilities. A proper prior is deﬁned based 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 −6 −4 −2 x 10 4 Log Estimates of Marginal Likelihood Number of Hidden States K Log Marginal Likelihood 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0 0.5 1 Standard Error ˆp(Mk|∆ Y) Max Log-Likelihood Standard Error Figure 3: Log of the bridge sampling estimator of the marginal likelihood ˆp(∆Y|Mk) under the default prior for K = 1,..., 10. The maximum is at K = 3. On the right-hand axis the standard error is shown for each model. on the methodology suggested by Fr¨ uhwirth-Schnatter (Frühwirth-Schnatter, 2008). The prior combines the hierarchal prior for state speciﬁc variances σ2 k with a informative prior on the transition matrix A by assum- ing that each row ( ai1,..., aiK), i = 1,..., K follows a Dirichlet Dir( ei1,..., eiK) prior where ei j = 4 and ei j = 1/(d−1) for i , j. By choosing eii > ei j the HMM is bounded away from a ﬁnite mixture model (Frühwirth- Schnatter, 2008). The vector π = {π1,...,π K} of the initial states is drawn from the ergodic distribution of the hidden Markov chain. As a point estimate is required for Θ, we must move from the distributional estimate to a point estimate. This is done by approximating the posterior mode. The pos- terior mode is the value of Θ which maximizes the non- normalized mixture posterior density log p∗(Θ|∆Y) = log p(∆Y|Θ) + log p(Θ). The posterior mode estima- tor is the optimal estimator with respect to the 0/1 loss function. The estimator is approximated by the MCMC draw with the largest value of log p∗(Θ|∆Y). As samples from the beginning of the chain may not accurately represent the desired distribution a “burn-in” period of 2,000 draws was used. Run length was set to 10,000 draws. Implementation used the Bayesf tool- box with full details of the approach followed found in subsection 11.3.3 of (Frühwirth-Schnatter, 2006). A se- lection of the MCMC outputs are shown in Figure 4. 9 --- [Page 10 / 23] --- −10 −5 0 5 0 1 2 3 Histogram of the Data ∆ Y Density −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 µ σ 2 Point Process Representation 0 5000 10000 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 Posterior Draws for µ k MCMC Draw Number µ k 0 5000 10000 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Posterior Draws for σ k 2 MCMC Draw Number σ k 2 k=1 k=2 k=3 Figure 4: Markov Chain Monte Carlo by the Metropolis- Hastings algorithm. Subplot one, histogram of the data in comparison to the ﬁtted 3 component Gaussian mixture distri- bution. Subplot two, a point process representation for K = 3. Subplot three, MCMC posterior draws for µk. Subplot four, MCMC posterior draws forσ2 k 3.4. Learning Summary In this subsection the major di ﬀerences the three methods of learning are considered and the results com- pared. The three techniques for estimating the number of hidden states all gave very similar results. Cross val- idation for PLR gave K = 2, penalized likelihood cri- teria for Baum-Welch gave K = 3 and bridge-sampling for MCMC gave K = 3. For a momentum model both K = 2 and K = 3 makes sense, as K = 2 could cor- respond to an upward /downward-trending momentum states, with K = 3 meaning an additional no-trending momentum state. Any higher values of K may just be considered noise. Subplot three of Figure 4 sup- ports this hypothesis by showing that the gradient of the trend is either positive, negative or zero, correspond- ing to upward/downward/no-trending states. These ob- servations translate into diﬀerent conditional means for the two/three normal distributions and are reported in the results Section 7. The framework or two or three states is appealing as experiments with MACD momen- tum models have shown only the sign of the predictive signal has traction against the sign of future returns. The magnitude of the signal does not seem able to predict the magnitude of future returns. The inclusion of the PLR learning allows a “naive” estimate of the system parameters to be compared to the formal EM and MCMC techniques. Both determinis- tic Baum-Welch and stochastic MCMC use statistical inference to ﬁnd the number of hidden states and sys- tem parameters in an HMM. Baum-Welch can be used for maximum likelihood inference or for maximum a- posteriori (MAP) estimates. A Bayesian approach re- tains distributional information about the unknown pa- rameters which MCMC can be used to approximate. Baum-Welch computes point estimates (modes) of the posterior distribution of parameters, while MCMC gen- erates distributional outputs. Both learning approaches have their advantages and disadvantages. One pass of the EM algorithm is computationally similar to one sweep of MCMC, however typically many more MCMC sweeps are run than EM iterations, meaning the computational cost for MCMC is much higher. Baum- Welch does not always converge on the global maxima, whereas MCMC suﬀers from the diﬃculty of choosing a good prior and potentially poor mixing of MCMC. For MCMC, estimating the number of latent states by a mix- ture likelihood may be a fragile process. It will obvi- ously depend upon the distributions chosen. If a non- Gaussian distribution were selected, the mixture might be of lower order. This point also applies to the other learning approaches as well. In summary EM is found to be the simplest and quickest solution (Rydén, 2008). The relative predictive performance of the three sets of Θ is presented in Section 7. So far, we have considered the relatively simply spec- iﬁcation of two and three state Markov regime switch- ing between Gaussian distributions. This approach is well known to be able to capture some aspects of the nonlinearity of price formation, however it does su ﬀer from overﬁtting and unobservability in the underlying states. Chen et al provide an interesting critique of other such approaches applied to forecasting electricity prices (Chen and Bunn, 2014). The authors conclude that a ﬁnite mixture approach to regime switching performs best in out-of-sample testing, a methodology that we may look to in future work. In the following section, the sophistication of the model is increased by the in- clusion of exogenous information. 4. Side Information In this Section, the case where the probability of any given state in A is a ﬀected by side information from outside the model is considered. This is important as A governs the dynamics of Y. In “classical” trading mod- els, the t + 1 return of a security is forecast by a “signal” which is a univariate time series, typically synchronous and continuous between±1. When this signal is> 0 the trader will go “long” and when the signal is at < 0 the trader will go “short”. In the simple case of a portfolio 10 --- [Page 11 / 23] --- consisting of only one security, the number of lots of security to be traded is directly proportional to the prod- uct of the signal magnitude and available capital. His- torically such predictive trading signals are generated from either “technicals” or “fundamentals”. Technicals are signals based on the prior behaviour of the security (Schwager, 1995b). Fundamentals are signals based on upon extrinsic factors (such as economic data) (Schwa- ger, 1995a). In this section two predictive signals are generated and shown to have statistical traction against security returns. In Section 5, the information held in these signals is used when learning A. This methodol- ogy is quite general and as such could be applied to any technical or fundamental predictor. Momentum traders often want to combine their mo- mentum signal with one or more extrinsic predictive sig- nals to give a single forecast. This is called the signal combination problem for which a variety of di ﬀerent solutions exist, for example, Bayesian model averag- ing (Hoeting et al., 1999), frequentist model averaging (Wang et al., 2009), expert tracking (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006) and ﬁltering (Genasay et al., 2001). It is noted that our approach of biasing the transition dynam- ics of an HMM momentum trading system using exter- nal predictors seems to be another possible solution to this problem. 4.1. Forecasting with Splines Splines are now introduced as the methodology by which we condition learning of the transition matrix. Splines are a way of estimating a noisy relationship between dependent and independent variables, while allowing for subsequent interpolation and evaluation (Reinsch, 1967). Splines have been used extensively in the ﬁnancial trading literature, in areas as diverse as volatility estimation (Audrino and Bühlmann, 2009), yield curve modelling (Bowsher and Meeks, 2008) and returns forecasting (Dablemont, 2010). We use a B- spline as a way of capturing a stationary, non-linear rela- tionship between predictor and security return. Splines are implemented in MATLAB using the shape mod- elling language toolbox (D’Errico, 2011) and thecurve ﬁtting toolbox (MATLAB, 2009). In our experience ﬁt- ting splines seems to be as much an art as a science with sources of variability including how to treat end- points and the number of knots depending on the degree of “belief” in the underlying economic argument of the relationship. Each spline is forced to be zero mean by setting the integral of the spline to be zero, as the mean value of a function is the integral of that function di- vided by the length of the support of that function. A zero mean spline ensures that no persistent bias is al- lowed over the interval of estimation. For a predictor X ={x1, x2,..., xT} the learning and subsequent fore- casting procedure is shown in Algorithm 2. where t = 1,..., T is intra-day time and n = Alg. 2 Learning and Forecasting With Splines. ∆ ˆY = LAFWS(Y, X) 1: for n = 1 to N do 2: for t = 1 to T do 3: ∆y = log ( ynt ynt−1 ) {Take re- turns} 4: end for 5: ∆¯y = ∆y−µ∆y σ∆y {Normalize the return, ∆¯y∼ Norm(0, 12)} 6: Gn−n′ :n = spline(xn−n′ :n, ∆¯yn−n′ :n) {Generate splineG} 7: if n> n ′′ then 8: for t = 1 to T do 9: ∆ˆyt = Gn−n′′ :n (xt) {Evaluate the spline} 10: end for 11: end if 12: end for 1,..., n ′ , n ′′ ,..., N is inter-day time. Spline evaluation is intra-day while spline learning is inter-day where the spline is “grown” over time, allowing it to capture new information and forget old information. The normaliza- tion step for price is carried out using an exponentially weighted moving average process for both meanµ∆y and volatilityσ∆y (Pesaran et al., 2009). In our coden ′′ = 66 days with N = 258 days and T = 856 observations per day. In this way the spline is estimated using the previ- ous 66 trading days worth of data, on a rolling basis. In the next two sections we implement two popular “oﬀ the shelf” predictors from the literature which ex- ploit intraday eﬀects and use them to generate X. 4.2. Predictor I: Volatility Ratio An extensive body of empirical research exists show- ing that realized volatility has predictive power against security returns (Christoﬀersen and Diebold, 2003; Hib- bert et al., 2008; Giot, 2005; Burghardt and Liu, 2008). These observations can be explained by showing that the sign dynamics of security returns are driven by volatility dynamics (Kinlay, 2006). Modelling the re- turns process ∆yt as Gaussian with mean µ and con- ditional volatility σt allows for probability distribution function f and a cumulative distribution function F. The probability of a positive returnp(∆yt+1)> 0 is given 11 --- [Page 12 / 23] --- by F = 1− p([0, f ]). This shows the probability of a positive return is a function of conditional volatility σt+1|t and so asσt+1|t increases, the probability of a pos- itive return falls. In order to be able to beneﬁt from this relationship a forecast forσt+1|t is required. Much literature exists on the subject of volatility fore- casting, a summary of which is beyond the scope of this paper so instead the reader is directed to three excellent reviews (Poon and Granger, 2003; Pesaran et al., 2009; Zaﬀaroni, 2008). The main ﬁnding of these reviews is that the sophisticated volatility models can not out perform the simplest models with any statistical signiﬁ- cance and for that reason we use the IGARCH(1,1), oth- erwise known as the J.P. Morgan Risk Metrics EWMA model (JPM, 1996; Pafka and Kondor, 2001). A draw- back to this approach are the recent ﬁndings in the lit- erature that volatility estimation with data above ∼20- minute frequency can lead to artifacts in the estimate (Andersen et al., 2011). The EWMA methodology exponentially weights the observations, representing the ﬁnite memory of the mar- ket, as per Equation (4), σt+1|t = √ (1−λ) ψ∑ τ=0 λτ∆y2 t−τ (4) The model has two parameters ψ (window size) and λ (variance decay factor where 0 < λ < 1) which are ﬁxed a-priori with a trade-o ﬀ between λ and ψ, with a smallλ yielding similar results to a small ψ. The origi- nal J.P. Morgan documentation suggests usingλ = 0.94 with daily frequency data, though we increase the reac- tivity of the term to ﬁt our one minute frequency data and set λ = 0.79 (Pesaran and Pesaran, 2007; Patton, 2010). This leaves the only parameter of the model as the number of historical observationsψ to include in the estimate. There are many technical indicators that are based on volatility in the popular trading literature, includ- ing bollinger bands, the ratio of implied to realized volatility, and the ratio of current volatility to historical volatility. We choose to implement the latter termed the volatility ratio as designed by Chande in 1992 (Chande, 1992) which requires estimating conditional volatilities for “now” and in the “past” (Colby, 2002; investope- dia.com, 2016; quantshare.com, 2016). We parameter sweep the ratio and select valuesψ f ast = 50 andψslow = 100 based on stability and predictive performance. The input to Algorithm 2 is given by X = 4.3. Predictor II: Seasonality Seasonality is an extremely well documented e ﬀect in the ﬁnancial markets and is deﬁned by returns from securities’ varying predictably according to a cyclical pattern across a time-scale (Bernstein, 1998). The time- scale of the variation in question varies from multi-year (Booth and Booth, 2003) to yearly (Lakonishok and Smidt, 1988), monthly (Ariel, 1987), weekly (Franses and Paap, 2000), daily (Peiro, 1994) and intraday (Tay- lor, 2010). The fact that the periodicity (i.e. frequency) is ﬁxed and known a-priori, distinguishes the eﬀect from other cyclical patterns in security returns (Taylor, 2007). Intra-daily seasonality is where returns vary condi- tionally on the location within the trading day. Hirsch observes in 1987, that in the case of the Dow Jones In- dustrial Average, the market spends most of the trading day going down and a very small amount of time going up (i.e. the rises are large and fast and the falls are grad- ual and slow), with the rises happening post-open and post-lunch (Hirsch, 1987). A wide range of methodologies for extracting season- ality signals from ﬁnancial data exist in the literature, in- cluding FFT (Murphy, 1987), seasonal GARCH (Bail- lie and Bollerslev, 1991), ﬂexible Fourier form (An- dersen and Bollerslev, 1997), wavelets (Gencay et al., 2002), Bayesian auto-regression (Canova, 1993), linear regression (Lovell, 1963) and splines (Huptas, 2009). As we know the size of the cycle a-priori, believe the eﬀect to be non-linear and prefer to work in the time- domain, splines are chosen to estimate the relation- ship between time of day and security return. The use of splines seems to be a well accepted way of capturing seasonality, for example (Martin-Rodriguez and Caceres-Hernandez, 2005; Robb, 1980; Cáceres- Hernández and Martín-Rodríguez, 2007; Taylor, 2010; Martín Rodríguez and Cáceres Hernández, 2010). Following the approach of Martin et al a seasonal index is used to quantify the cycle (Martín Rodríguez and Cáceres Hernández, 2010). Here the author con- structs an index by deﬁning the period of time under consideration and then partitioning it into a periodic grid between one and T and then assigning observations to buckets on this grid. The authors then capture the sea- sonal variation by ﬁtting a spline to the seasonal index and bucketed-data. In the case of our one-minute fre- quency data the size of the period isT = 856. The input to Algorithm 2 is given by X = [1,..., T]. 4.4. Simulation and Results For our data set consisting of one-years worth of ES data at one minute frequency, Algorithm 2 is applied to 12 --- [Page 13 / 23] --- the two predictors and results presented. Firstly, the two splines generated from the training data set are shown in Figure 5. It can be seen the relationship is non-linear. It is also clear that the integral of the splines is zero, mean- ing that a series of random evaluations of the spline will lead to a zero mean signal as required. By the degree of local structure of the splines it is clear that these are empirical relationships, however this does not invalidate them as predictors, but merely requires a stronger belief in the underlying economic hypotheses behind them. The economic interpretation of Figure 5 for the volatil- ity ratio predictor is that a small (0.6) ratio of recent to old volatility means that risk is falling, and so the spline suggests buying. A large (0.8) ratio of recent to old volatility means that risk is rising, and so the spline suggests selling. For the seasonality predictor the spline suggests buying in the early morning and selling in the afternoon. The choice of the number of knots for the spline is im- portant. Too many knots means the spline will be very tightly ﬁtted to the data, while too few knots may fail to capture the relationship of interest. The problem with over-ﬁtting the relationship being that the in-sample performance will be great, but the out-of-sample per- formance will be poor. Hence it is a matter of balance which is decided upon by intuition about the variabil- ity of the underlying economic relationship. 6 knots are chosen for the volatility predictor and 10 knots for the seasonality predictor. Increasing the number of knots on the volatility predictor to 40, doubles the predictive per- formance in-sample, but is probably just ﬁtting to noise. The performance of the two strategies can now be simulated against a benchmark of a long-only strategy. Special care is taken to ensure that the simulation is a truly out-of-sample simulation. Speciﬁcally, each one of the data points used to evaluate a trade had not been used in any of the previous stages of model identiﬁca- tion, learning and estimation. The annualized Sharpe ratio is a popular measure of risk-adjusted return and is deﬁned as √ N(µ−r) σ whereµ is the mean strategy return, σ is the standard deviation of the strategy return,r is the risk free rate and N is the number of trading periods in the year. The ratio is computed by calculating a vector of daily returns, generated by ﬁnding the total intraday strategy return each day and setting N = 258. This ag- gregation approach is preferable to scaling by √ N for intraday N, as the output is more stable. As our ﬁnal signal is zero mean and interest is earned at rate r on short futures positions, we set r = 0. The results of the simulation are shown in Figure 6. Subplot one shows the annual returns for the two strate- gies against a long-only portfolio for the 258 trading days of 2011. It can be seen that the returns proﬁle is diﬀerent for the two strategies so that while the volatil- ity strategy return is higher it also more volatile which results in the two strategies having similar risk adjusted return proﬁles. Subplot two shows the mean (pre-cost) annualized Sharpe ratios for the strategies. The Sharpe ratio of both strategies is around 2.0, as commonly re- quired for an intraday trading strategy to be successful. Subplot three shows the correlation coeﬃcients between the strategies, which are either small and positive or negative, as required for a diverse portfolio. In summary both predictors seem to have traction against forecasting the returns of ES and thus contain information of predictive use. For that reason we try and incorporate them into our HMM momentum model. The “classical way” of doing this would be to combine the ﬁnal three signals, for example, by taking a weighted mean. Rather than combine the signals outright, the information held in the splines is used in the learning phase. 5. Learning With Side Information 5.1. Introduction The HMM of Figure 1 states that the probability of transitioning between momentum states is only depen- dent on the last momentum state, p(mt|mt−1). From Sec- tion 4 we have two splines that we know contain use- ful information when it comes to predicting security re- turns. In this Section the HMM is re-speciﬁed by incor- porating the side information held in the splines, such that the transition distribution is given by p(mt|mt−1, xt). The belief behind this new model is that the extrinsic data is of value to predicting the change in price of the security. Essentially we are saying that not all of the securities’ variance can be explained by the momentum eﬀect, even though we believe it to be the dominant fac- tor. 5.2. Input Output Hidden Markov Models In Input Output Hidden Markov Models (IOHMMs) the observed distributions are referred to as inputs and the emission distributions as outputs (Bengio and Fras- coni, 1995). Like regular HMMs, IOHMMs have a ﬁxed number of hidden states, however the output and transi- tion distributions are not only conditioned on the cur- rent state, but are also conditioned on an observed dis- crete input value X. In the HMM of Section 2.2, Θ was chosen to maximize the likelihood of the observations given the correct classiﬁcation sequence p(∆Y|M, Θ). 13 --- [Page 14 / 23] --- 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 Volatility Ratio Spline on e−Mini S&P500 Future (258 trading days of 2011) Volatility Ratio Returns −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 x 10 −3 Interday Seasonality Spline on e−Mini S&P500 Future (258 trading days of 2011) Time of day (Chicago local time) Returns 0100 0200 0300 0400 0500 0600 0700 0800 0900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 15001515 Figure 5: Forecasting splines. Subplot one shows the spline generated by the volatility ratio predictor. Subplot two shows the spline generated by the seasonality predictor. This approach could be generalized when using N predictors, by generating an N-dimensional spline. Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15 Time % Return Cumulative Percentage Returns (2011−2012) Volatility Ratio Seasonality Long−only Volatility Ratio Seasonality Long−only 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 Annualized Strategy Sharpe Ratios Strategy Sharpe Ratio Long−only Seasonality Volatility Ratio Volatility Ratio Seasonality Long−only Inter−Strategy Correlation Coefficents 0.17 −0.15 1 −0.48 1 −0.15 1 −0.48 0.17 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Figure 6: Forecasting splines results. Subplot one shows the annual returns for the two strategies against a long-only portfolio for the 258 trading days of 2011. Subplot two shows the mean (pre-cost) annualized Sharpe ratios for the strategies. Subplot three shows the correlation coeﬃcients between the strategies. IOHMMs are trained to maximize the likelihood of the conditional distribution p(∆Y|X, Θ), where the latent variable M is stochastically relayed to the output vari- able ∆Y. A schematic of the model is shown in Figure 7. We consider the simplifying case where the input and output sequences are synchronous (Bengio et al., 1999). Such a system can be represented with dis- crete state space distributions for emission p(∆yt|mt, xt) and transition p(mt|mt−1, xt). When the extrinsic pre- dictor and the HMM momentum predictor have di ﬀer- ent time stamps, or are of di ﬀerent sampling frequen- 14 --- [Page 15 / 23] --- 2 3 3 2 1 Δy1 p state prior observation function state transition function observation state m m m m 1x x x2 3 external information Δy Δy Figure 7: Bayesian network showing the conditional indepen- dence assumption of a synchronous IOHMM. ∆Y is an ob- servable discrete output, X is an observable discrete input and M is an unobservable discrete variable. The model at time t is described by the latent state conditional on the observed state and some external information p(mt|∆y1:t, xt). cies, an asynchronous setup is required, adding compu- tational complexity to the forward-backward recursion (Bengio and Bengio, 1996). It is noted such a technique could allow signals of a lower frequency to be used in a high-frequency inference problem, for example, low- frequency macro-economic data could be used to bias intraday trading. The literature suggests three main approaches to learning in IOHMM: Artiﬁcial neural networks (Ben- gio and Frasconi, 1995), partially observable Markov decision processes (Bäuerle and Rieder, 2011) and EM (Bengio et al., 1999). As Baum-Welch (an EM variant) was used for learning in the HMM case, in order to be consistent we opt to learn by EM for the IOHMM case too. In terms of Algorithm 1 the only changes required to deal with the IOHMM case are to lines 8 and 13, αt(k) = ∑ mt−1 p(zt|mt, xt)p(mt|mt−1, xt−1)αt−1(k) βt(k) = ∑ mt+1 p(zt+1|mt+1, xt+1)p(mt+1|mt, xt)βt+1(k) To implement this methodology a diﬀerent A is trained for every unique value of X. Such an approach has the drawbacks of over parameterization and requiring large amounts of data. This is solved by discretizing the spline according to its roots, with R− 1 roots giv- ing R “buckets” of spline. xt is then aligned with ∆yt, and ∆yt assigned to one of the R buckets, the contents of each bucket being concatenated to give a data vector. Baum-Welch learning with Algorithm 1 is then carried out on each of these vectors, as before. As the transi- tion distribution p(mt|mt−1, xt) is time sequential, con- catenating the bucketed data is strictly incorrect as oc- casionally p(mt|mt−τ, xt) occurs, where τ > 1. In the case of the two splines in Figure 5, the discretization gives R = 5 and R = 2 for the volatility and seasonal- ity predictors respectively. Given the smoothness of the splines, concatenation is rare and so the resulting small loss of Markovian structure can be ignored. The obvi- ous advantage of discretizing by roots is that parameters {A1, A2,..., AR} map to signed returns. The learning al- gorithm for IOHMM is shown in Algorithm 3. Alg. 3 IOHMM Learning. ˆΘ = iohhmLearning(∆Y, X) 1: R = NewtonRaphson (G) {Find the roots of spline G} 2: Z1:R = map (∆Y, X, R) {Map ∆Y to buckets corre- sponding to the roots ofG} 3: for r = 1 to R do 4: ˆΘr = BW(Zr) {Baum-Welch on the R buckets, as per Algorithm 1} 5: end for Using the methodology described above, two inde- pendent predictions are generated for each of the two IOHMM models, one for the volatility ratio and one for seasonality. However, it maybe the case we wish to combine the two predictors into a single prediction. In this case of more than one predictor,X is treated as mul- tivariate and a multi-dimensional spline is generated. Subject to some appropriate discretization of the spline, Algorithm 3 can then be applied to solve p(mt|mt−1, x¯t) where x¯t is a vector. 6. Inference Phase We ﬁrst present inference for the default HMM case and then consider the IOHMM case. The aim of the in- ference phase is to ﬁnd the marginal predictive distribu- tion p(∆yt|∆y1:t−1, Θ). This is found using the forward algorithm (Bishop, 2006). The likelihood vector, size K× 1, corresponds to the observation probabilities and together with the transi- tion probabilities fully describes the model. It is deﬁned as, p(∆yt|mt = k, Θ) ∝ Norm ( ∆yt;µk,σ 2 k ) (5) = 1 σk √ 2π exp − 1 2σ2 k [∆yt−µk ]2  If the Gaussian assumption of Equation (2) was dropped then Equation (5) would be of a di ﬀerent form. Or in the case of a non-parametric approach, the density of p(∆Y|M, Θ) would be evaluated at this step. 15 --- [Page 16 / 23] --- The ﬁrst step of the prediction is diﬀerent to the sub- sequent steps, due to not yet being in the recursive chain. The ﬁrst step starts with a prior over the hidden states, p(m1 = k|∆y1) ∝ p(m1 = k)p(∆y1|m1 = k) ∝ πk× Norm ( ∆y1;µk,σ 2 k ) = πk× Norm ( ∆y1;µk,σ 2 k ) ∑ k′ πk′× Norm ( ∆y1;µk′,σ 2 k′ ) Once initialization has been dealt with, the rest of the process can be decomposed into a recursive formula- tion. The recursions update the posterior ﬁltering dis- tribution in two steps: Firstly a prediction step propa- gates the posterior distribution at the previous time step through the target dynamics to form the one step ahead prediction distribution. Secondly an update step incor- porates the new data through Bayes’ rule to form the new ﬁltering distribution. The ﬁltering distributionωt|t,k is given by, ωt|t,k ≜ p(mt = k|∆y1:t) ∝ p(mt = = k) ∝ ωt|t−1,k p(∆yt|mt = k) = ωt|t−1,k× Norm ( ∆yt;µk,σ 2 k ) ∑ k′ ωt|t−1,k′× Norm ( ∆yt;µk′,σ 2 k′ ) The predictive distributionωt|t−1,k is found by multiply- ing the ﬁltering distribution by the state transition ma- trix, ωt|t−1,k = ∑ k′ akk′ p(mt−1 = k ′ |∆y1:t−1) = ∑ k′ akk′ωt−1|t−1,k′ The prediction ∆ˆyt is then found by taking the ex- pectation of the marginal predictive density distribution p(∆yt|∆y1:t−1), ∆ˆyt = ∑ ∆yt ∆yt× p(∆yt|∆y1:t−1) = ∑ ∆yt ∆yt ∑ k p(mt = = k) = ∑ k ωt|t−1,k×µ∗ k Where µ∗ k is the mean of the discretized Gaussian p(∆yt|mt = k). The full approach is summarized in Al- gorithm 4. Inference in the IOHMM case is very similar to the HMM case, though here Θ is conditional on xt. The Alg. 4 HMM Prediction. Signal = HMM(∆Y, Θ) 1: Update for ﬁrst step 2: ω1|1,k = k) ∑ k′ πk′×Norm ( ∆yt;µk′,σ2 k′ ) 3: for t = 2 to T do 4: Predict 5: ωt|t−1,k = ∑ k′ akk′ωt−1|t−1,k′ 6: ∆ˆyt = ∑ kωt|t−1,k×µ∗ k 7: 8: Update 9: ωt|t,k = k) ∑ k′ ωt|t−1,k′×Norm ( ∆yt;µk′,σ2 k′ ) 10: 11: Output 12: Signalt = TF(∆ˆyt) {Apply a transfer function} 13: end for IOHMM version of the prediction algorithm is summa- rized in Algorithm 5. Alg. 5 IOHMM Prediction. Signal = IOHMM(∆Y, X, ¯Θ) 1: Update for ﬁrst step 2: ω1|1,k = k) ∑ k′ πk′×Norm ( ∆yt;µk′,σ2 k′ ) 3: for t = 2 to T do 4: Θ =F ( ¯Θ, xt ) {Parameter lookup table} 5: Predict 6: ωt|t−1,k = ∑ k′ akk′ωt−1|t−1,k′ 7: ∆ˆyt = ∑ kωt|t−1,k×µ∗ k 8: 9: Update 10: ωt|t,k = k) ∑ k′ ωt|t−1,k′×Norm ( ∆yt;µk′,σ2 k′ ) 11: 12: Output 13: Signalt = TF(∆ˆyt) {Apply a transfer function} 14: end for 6.0.1. Asynchronous Price Data In the above form, Algorithm 4 supports data which lies on a discrete time grid. The popularity of such syn- chronous methodologies in dealing with ﬁnancial data arises from the computational challenge of dealing with the huge amounts of data generated by the markets. In reality, ﬁnancial data isasynchronous due to trades clus- tering together (Dufour and Engle, 2000). Aggregation is the process of moving from asynchronous to syn- chronous data and this acts as a zero-one ﬁlter. Such a 16 --- [Page 17 / 23] --- rough down-sampling procedure means potentially use- ful high-frequency information is thrown away. The Bayesian approach to this problem is to keep as much information as possible and then let the model decide how what parts are/are not needed. Our model can be altered to deal with asynchronous data by modifying the observation equation in Equation (2) by scaling up the observation inter-arrival times, ∆yti =µmti ∆ti +ϵti, ϵ ti∼ N(0,σ 2 mti ∆ti) where ∆ti = ti− ti−1 is the time between asynchronous observations. Such a representation su ﬀers the draw- back that µmti does not change evenly over time, but changes asynchronously according to observation time. The HMM could be further modiﬁed to incorporate smooth µmti change, for example by using continuous- time HMMs, but this is beyond the scope of this paper. 7. Data and Simulation Data from the CME GLOBEX e-mini S&P500 (ES) future is used, one of the most liquid securities’ in the world. Tick data is used for the period 01 /01/2011 to 31/12/2011, giving 258 days data. The synchronous form of the algorithm is implemented and the tick data pre-processed by aggregating to periodic spacing on a one minute grid, giving 856 observations per day. Only 0100-1515 Chicago time is considered, Monday-Friday, corresponding to the most liquid trading hours. 1515 Chicago time is when the GLOBEX server closes down for its maintenance break and when the exchange o ﬃ- cially deﬁnes the end of the trading day. Only use the front month contract is used, with contract rolling car- ried out 12 days before expiry. Only GLOBEX (elec- tronic) trades are considered, with pit (human) trades being excluded. No additional cleaning beyond what the data provider has done is carried out. As synchronous prices are generated on a close-to- close basis, in simulation the forecast signal is lagged by one period so that look-ahead is not incurred. The strategy return is then equal to the security return mul- tiplied by the lagged signal. Learning is carried out on data from the second half of 2010. For all ﬁve momen- tum strategies, the mean and variance were speciﬁed for each state (i.e. the system was not tied). Evaluation of trading strategies is an extensive ﬁeld, e.g. (Aronson, 2006) and so just the key metrics of Sharpe ratio and returns are presented. The HMM strategies are bench- marked against the long-only case. The pre-cost results of the simulation using ES for the year 2011 are shown in Figure 8. The performance of the default HMM is the worst of the group of models. This is as expected and reﬂects the fact that A contains no information about the mar- ket, as all states are equally likely. The poor PLR per- formance can also be explained by the pair of negative trend terms (µPLR = in what was a rising market over the simulation period. While Baum- Welch was able to beat both the default HMM and the long-only case, MCMC was not able to beat the long- only case. There is no reason why Baum-Welch should be able to outperform MCMC - we believe this may re- ﬂect the di ﬃculty in using MCMC correctly. Reasons for the poor MCMC performance are now discussed, along with suggestions for improvement, • Just as EM can fail to ﬁnd the true global max- ima, MCMC can fail to converge to the station- ary distribution of the posterior probabilities (Gilks et al., 1996). Common causes for convergence fail- ure are too few draws and poor proposal densities (Kalos and Whitlock, 2008). Ergodic averages of MCMC draws which were generated by random permutation sampling are used to check conver- gence. Convergence can be seen to occur in Fig- ure 4 as the entire MCMC chain is roughly sta- tionary for ﬁrst and second moment parameters. Cowles et al recommend checking for convergence by a combination of strategies including applying diagnostic procedures to a small number of paral- lel chains, monitoring auto-correlations and cross- correlations (Cowles and Carlin, 1996). However, we do not believe convergence has failed in this case. • The mean emission parameters are Baum-Welch µ1:3 = 0.0183], MCMC µ1:3 = 0.121]. It can be seen that both have negative /zero/positive trend terms, but that the numerical values for the ﬁrst and third state are quite di ﬀerent. It maybe the case that MCMC has failed to visit all the highly probable regions of the parameter space because of local maxima in the posterior distribution. • The step of moving from the distributional estimate to the point estimate presents an opportunity for selecting sub-optimal Θ. Our implementation of MCMC approximates the posterior mode by keep- ing the sample with the highest posterior probabil- ity. It is possible however, that this approach could end up selecting a local maxima, as opposed the global maxima, leading to a sub-optimal estimate of Θ. In future work this step could be done by estimating the likelihood of each sample and then taking the maximum. 17 --- [Page 18 / 23] --- Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan −100 −50 0 50 100 Time % Return Cumulative Percentage Returns (2011−2012) Default HMM Baum−Welch HMM Volatility Ratio IOHMM Seasonality IOHMM MCMC HMM Long−only −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 Annualized Strategy Sharpe Ratios Sharpe Ratio Default HMM Baum−Welch HMMVolatility Ratio IOHMMSeasonality IOHMM MCMC HMMLong−only Inter−Strategy Correlation Coefficents 1 −0.68 −0.54 −0.78 −0.27 0.096 −0.68 1 0.71 0.91 0.41 −0.017 −0.54 0.71 1 0.75 0.25 0.078 −0.78 0.91 0.75 1 0.43 −0.12 −0.27 0.41 0.25 0.43 1 −0.039 0.096 −0.017 0.078 −0.12 −0.039 1 Default HMM Baum−Welch HMMVolatility Ratio IOHMMSeasonality IOHMM MCMC HMMLong−only Default HMM Baum−Welch HMM Volatility Ratio IOHMM Seasonality IOHMM MCMC HMM Long−only −0.5 0 0.5 1 Figure 8: Simulation results for the ﬁve variations of the HMM intraday momentum trading strategy, with K = 2 or 3, plus the long-only case. • Choice of prior maybe more inﬂuential than might be expected (Frühwirth-Schnatter, 2008). While we have followed the recommendations of the liter- ature, it might be that using a more diﬀuse prior on A would give better results, as it would allow the parameter space to be more thoroughly searched. Failure to search correctly could happen if the ex- isting prior was too strong and overwhelms the data, but this would be unusual given the amount of data used for learning. In particular we believe the use of a uniform prior should cause the results of MCMC and EM to converge. Another approach would be to initialize MCMC with Baum-Welch. If the search moves away from the initial search space, then it might be the case, that the chains are taking a very long time to mix. • The proposal density maybe poorly chosen leading to acceptance rates which are too high or too low. In future work we suggest modifying the proposal density to incorporate work from optimal proposal scalings (Neal and Roberts, 2006) and adaptive al- gorithms (Levine and Casella, 2006) to attempt to ﬁnd good proposals automatically. Interestingly the MCMC and Baum-Welch strategy re- turns have a reasonably high correlation at 0.41, sug- gesting that they maybe picking up the same market moves, but with MCMC doing so in a less timely (op- timal) fashion. Over the trading times considered, ES rose resulting in a Sharpe ratio of 0.4, approximately equal to its long run average. The failure of MCMC to beat the long-only case, while Baum-Welch does, again points to the fact that parameter selection has failed for MCMC. All of the HMMs have a low correlation to the long-only case, which is as expected given all the HMMs have a zero mean signal. Post-cost results re- duce the Sharpe ratio of the HMM strategies by approx- imately 15%. The IOHMM models are both able to beat the Baum- Welch HMM model Sharpe ratio by more than 10%, re- ﬂecting the fact that the model is able to use the infor- mation X, which as known from Section 4 has predic- tive value. The Sharpe ratio from the IOHMM models is smaller than that from the individual side-informationX predictors, because the covariance between the individ- ual predictors and the momentum signal is greater than zero. Even though the Sharpe ratio of the IOHMM sig- nal is less than the Sharpe ratio of the individual X pre- dictors, this is not necessarily a bad thing as the correla- tion of the IOHMM returns has decreased relative to the benchmark returns. Institutional investors tend to run “portfolios of strategies” in order to diversify strategy risk. Here any strategy with a positive expectation and a low correlation to the existing return stream, maybe worthy of inclusion in that portfolio, even if the perfor- mance of the new strategy does not beat the benchmark. The simulation results shown in Figure 8 suggest that this strategy could be worthy of inclusion in such a port- folio. 18 --- [Page 19 / 23] --- 8. Conclusions and Further Work 8.1. Conclusions This paper has presented a viable framework for intraday trading of the momentum e ﬀect using both Bayesian sampling and maximum likelihood for param- eters, and Bayesian inference for state. The framework is intended to be a practical proposition to augment momentum trading systems based on low-pass ﬁlters, which have been use since the 1970’s. A key advantage of our state space formulation is that it does not su ﬀer from the delayed frequency response that digital ﬁlters do. It is this time lag which is the biggest cause of pre- dictive failure in digital ﬁlter based momentum systems, due their poor ability to detect reversals in trend at mar- ket change points. As the number of latent momentum states in the mar- ket data is never known, it has to be estimated. Three estimation techniques are used, cross-validation, penal- ized likelihood criteria and MCMC bridge sampling. All three techniques give very similar results, namely that the system consists of 2 or 3 hidden states. Learning of the system parameters is principally car- ried out by two methods, namely frequentist Baum- Welch and Bayesian MCMC. Theoretically MCMC probably should be able to outperform Baum-Welch, however when carrying out simulations on out of sam- ple data, it is found that Baum-Welch gives the best pre- dictive performance. The reasons for this are unclear, but it maybe because selecting a good prior is hard for our system, or that the single point estimate of Baum- Welch maybe close to the “correct” value, giving supe- rior performance over the Bayesian marginalization of the parameters by MCMC. Often a trend-following system will want to incor- porate external information, in addition to the momen- tum signal, leading to the signal combination problem. An IOHMM is formulated as possible solution to this problem. In an IOHMM, the transition distribution is conditioned not only on the current state, but also on an observed external signal. Two such external sig- nals are generated, seasonality and volatility ratio, both with positive Sharpe ratios, and are incorporated into the IOHMM. The performance of the IOHMM can be seen to be improved over the HMM, suggesting the IOHMM methodology used is a possible solution to the signal combination problem. In addition to presenting novel applications of HMMs, this paper provides additional support for the momentum eﬀect being proﬁtable, pre- and post-cost, and adds to the substantial body of evidence on the ef- fect. While much of the existing literature shows that the momentum eﬀect is strongest at the 1-3 month pe- riod, we have shown the eﬀect is viable at higher trading frequencies too. Finally it is noted that this work is an instance of unsupervised learning under a single basic generative model. As such it can be linked to other work in the ﬁeld by noting when the state variables presented in this model become continuous and Gaussian, the problem can be solved by a Kalman ﬁlter and when continuous and non-Gaussian the problem can be solved by a parti- cle ﬁlter, for example (Christensen et al., 2012). 8.2. Further Work In future work we would like to explore in detail why learning Θ by MCMC results in poorer performance than by Baum-Welch. In particular the selection of the prior and the proposal density seem worthy of further investigation, as discussed in Section 7. In this paper just the best sample of Θ was retained. An improved prediction might be possible by retaining all the samples and averaging their predictions. Fully Bayesian inference uses the distributional estimate of Θ output from MCMC. Denoting the training data as Z and the out of sample data as ∆Y, MCMC gives i = 1,..., I samples from the posterior distribution, s.t. Θi∼ p(Θ|Z,Mk). The predictive density can then be determined by, p(∆Y|Z,Mk) = ∫ p(∆Y|Z, ≈ I∑ i=1 p(∆Y|Z, Θi,Mk) A closely related approach that could also be investi- gated is Bayesian Model averaging (BMA) (Hoeting et al., 1999). While the Bayesian inference just de- scribed performs averaging over the distribution of pa- rameters Θ, BMA performs averaging at the level of the modelMk. BMA might be a sensible approach given the similarity of the MCMC marginal likelihoods used for model selection. Predictive performance may also be improved by re- moving the model’s parametric assumption and chang- ing to use asynchronous data. By using a more natural description of emission noise, the ﬁt of the model could be improved. In the current downsampling of the data it maybe that useful high-frequency information is getting thrown away. Using asynchronous data would be the most Bayesian approach, allowing the model to decide what to do with that high-frequency information. Finally, an interesting area of future research could be to compare the IOHMM methodology with other 19 --- [Page 20 / 23] --- approaches to signal combination, such as a weighted mean of the Baum-Welch HMM and the individual pre- dictor signals. 9. Acknowledgements We acknowledge use of the following MATLAB toolboxes; Kevin Murphy’s “Probabilistic Modeling Toolkit” https://github.com/probml/pmtk and Sylvia Fr¨ uhwirth-Schnatter’s “Bayesf” www.wu.ac.at/statmath/en/faculty_staff/ faculty/sfruehwirthschnatter. References Adams, R. P., MacKay, D. J., 2007. Bayesian online changepoint de- tection. Tech. rep., Cambridge University. Akaike, H., 1974. A new look at the statistical model identiﬁcation. Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on 19 (6), 716–723. Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., 1997. Intraday periodicity and volatil- ity persistence in ﬁnancial markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 4 (2-3), 115 – 158, high Frequency Data in Finance, Part 1. Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Meddahi, N., 2011. Realized volatility forecasting and market microstructure noise. Journal of Economet- rics 160 (1), 220 – 234. Andrieu, C., Doucet, A., 2003. Online expectation-maximization type algorithms for parameter estimation in general state space mod- els. In: Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2003. Proceed- 2003 IEEE International Conference on. V ol. 6. IEEE, pp. VI–69. Andrieu, C., Doucet, A., Holenstein, R., 2010. Particle Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Se- ries B (Statistical Methodology) 72 (3), 269–342. Ang, A., Bekaert, G., 2002. Regime switches in interest rates. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 20 (2), 163–182. Anon, 6th Jan 2011. Momentum in ﬁnancial markets: Why Newton was wrong. The Economist. Ariel, R., 1987. A monthly eﬀect in stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 18 (1), 161–174. Aronson, D., 2006. Evidence-Based Technical Analysis: Applying the Scientiﬁc Method and Statistical Inference to Trading Signals. Wiley Trading. Attias, H., 1999. Inferring parameters and structure of latent variable models by variational Bayes. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth con- ference on Uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., pp. 21–30. Audrino, F., Bühlmann, P., 2009. Splines for ﬁnancial volatility. Jour- nal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Method- ology) 71 (3), 655–670. Baillie, R., Bollerslev, T., 1991. Intra-day and inter-market volatility in foreign exchange rates. The Review of Economic Studies 58 (3), 565–585. Bäuerle, N., Rieder, U., 2011. Markov Decision Processes with appli- cations to ﬁnance. Springer. Baum, L. E., Petrie, T., Soules, G., Weiss, N., 1970. A maximiza- tion technique occurring in the statistical analysis of probabilistic functions of Markov chains. The annals of mathematical statistics 41 (1), 164–171. Bengio, S., Bengio, Y ., 1996. An EM algorithm for asynchronous in- put/output hidden Markov models. In: International Conference On Neural Information Processing. Citeseer, pp. 328–334. Bengio, Y ., Frasconi, P., 1995. An input output hmm architecture. Ad- vances in neural information processing systems, 427–434. Bengio, Y ., et al., 1999. Markovian models for sequential data. Neural computing surveys 2, 129–162. Bernstein, J., 1998. Seasonality: Systems, Strategies and Signals. John Wiley & Sons. Bhar, R., Hamori, S., 2003. New evidence of linkages among g7 stock markets. Finance Letters 1 (1). Bhar, R., Hamori, S., 2004. Hidden Markov models: applications to ﬁnancial economics. Kluwer Academic Pub. Bishop, C., 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer. Booth, J., Booth, L., 2003. Is presidential cycle in security returns merely a reﬂection of business conditions? Review of Financial Economics 12 (2), 131–159. Bowsher, C., Meeks, R., 2008. The dynamics of economic functions: modeling and forecasting the yield curve. Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 (484), 1419–1437. Branger, N., Kraft, H., Meinerding, C., 2012. Partial information about contagion risk and portfolio choice. Tech. rep., Department of Finance, Goethe University. Buﬃngton, J., Elliott, R. J., 2002. American options with regime switching. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Fi- nance 5 (05), 497–514. Bulla, J., Bulla, I., 2006. Stylized facts of ﬁnancial time series and hid- den semi-Markov models. Computational Statistics & Data Anal- ysis 51 (4), 2192–2209. Burghardt, G., Liu, L., 2008. How stock price volatility a ﬀects stock returns and cta returns. Tech. rep., Newedge Brokerage. Cáceres-Hernández, J., Martín-Rodríguez, G., 2007. Heterogeneous seasonal patterns in agricultural data and evolving splines. The IUP Journal of Agricultural Economics 4 (3), 48–65. Canova, F., 1993. Forecasting time series with common seasonal pat- terns. Journal of Econometrics 55 (1-2), 173–200. Cesa-Bianchi, N., Lugosi, G., 2006. Prediction, Learning, and Games. Cambridge University Press. Chande, T. S., March 1992. Adapting moving averages to market volatility. Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities magazine 10(3), 108–114. Charlot, P., 2012. Modelling volatility and correlations with a hidden Markov decision tree. Tech. rep., Aix-Marseille University. Chen, D., Bunn, D., 2014. The forecasting performance of a ﬁnite mixture regime-switching model for daily electricity prices. Jour- nal of Forecasting. Chib, S., 2001. Markov chain Monte Carlo methods: computation and inference. Handbook of econometrics 5, 3569–3649. Chopin, N., Pelgrin, F., 2004. Bayesian inference and state number determination for hidden Markov models: An application to the information content of the yield curve about inﬂation. Journal of Econometrics 123 (2), 327–344. Christensen, H. L., Murphy, J., Godsill, S. J., 2012. Forecasting high- frequency futures returns using online langevin dynamics. Selected Topics in Signal Processing, IEEE Journal of 6 (4), 366–380. Christoﬀersen, P., Diebold, F., 2003. Financial asset returns, direction- of-change forecasting, and volatility dynamics. Tech. rep., NBER. Colby, R. W., 2002. The Encyclopedia Of Technical Market Indica- tors. McGraw-Hill. Cowles, M. K., Carlin, B. P., 1996. Markov chain Monte Carlo conver- gence diagnostics: a comparative review. Journal of the American Statistical Association 91 (434), 883–904. Dablemont, S., 2010. Forecasting of High Frequency Financial Time Series: Concepts, Methods, Algorithms. Lambert Academic Pub- lishing. Dai, M., Zhang, Q., Zhu, Q. J., 2010. Trend following trading under a regime switching model. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 20 --- [Page 21 / 23] --- 1 (1), 780–810. D’Errico, J., 2011. Shape language modelling www. mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/ 24443-slm-shape-language-modeling . Dueker, M., Neely, C. J., 2007. Can Markov switching models predict excess foreign exchange returns? Journal of Banking & Finance 31 (2), 279–296. Dueker, M. J., 1997. Markov switching in GARCH processes and mean-reverting stock-market volatility. Journal of Business & Eco- nomic Statistics 15 (1), 26–34. Dufour, A., Engle, R., 2000. Time and the price impact of a trade. The Journal of Finance 55 (6), 2467–2498. Durbin, J., Watson, G., 1971. Testing for serial correlation in least squares regression. iii. Biometrika 58 (1), 1–19. Elliott, R., Hinz, J., 2002. Portfolio optimization, hidden Markov models, and technical analysis of P&F charts. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 5 (04), 385–399. Elliott, R. J., Wilson, C. A., 2007. The term structure of interest rates in a hidden Markov setting. In: Hidden Markov Models in Finance. Springer, pp. 15–30. Faith, C., 2007. Way of the Turtle. McGraw-Hill Professional. Fine, S., Singer, Y ., Tishby, N., 1998. The hierarchical hidden Markov model: Analysis and applications. Machine learning 32 (1), 41–62. Franses, P., Paap, R., 2000. Modelling day-of-the-week seasonality in the s&p 500 index. Applied Financial Economics 10 (5), 483–488. Frühwirth-Schnatter, S., 2001. Markov chain Monte Carlo estimation of classical and dynamic switching and mixture models. Journal of the American Statistical Association 96 (453), 194–209. Frühwirth-Schnatter, S., 2006. Finite mixture and Markov switching models. Springer Science+ Business Media. Frühwirth-Schnatter, S., 2008. Comment on article by rydén. Bayesian Analysis 3 (4), 689–698. Gales, M., Young, S., 2008. The application of hidden Markov models in speech recognition. Foundations and Trends in Signal Process- ing (Now publishers). Gelman, A., 2011. Induction and deduction in Bayesian data analysis. Rationality, Markets and Morals (RMM) 2, 67–78. Genasay, R., Dacorogna, M., Muller, U. A., Pictet, O., 2001. An In- troduction to High-Frequency Finance. Academic Press. Gencay, R., Selcuk, F., Whitcher, B., 2002. An Introduction to Wavelets and Other Filtering Methods in Finance and Economics. Elsevier. Gerald, A., 1999. Technical analysis power tools for active investors. Financial Times Prentice Hall. Ghahramani, Z., Jordan, M. I., 1997. Factorial hidden Markov models. Machine learning 29 (2-3), 245–273. Giampieri, G., Davis, M., Crowder, M., 2005. A hidden Markov model of default interaction. Quantitative Finance 5 (1), 27–34. Gilks, W. R., Richardson, S., Spiegelhalter, D. J., 1996. Markov chain Monte Carlo in practice. V ol. 2. Chapman & Hall/CRC. Giot, P., 2005. Relationships between implied volatility indexes and stock index returns. The Journal of Portfolio Management 31 (3), 92–100. Green, P. J., 1995. Reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo com- putation and Bayesian model determination. Biometrika 82 (4), 711–732. Grégoir, S., Lenglart, F., 2000. Measuring the probability of a busi- ness cycle turning point by using a multivariate qualitative hidden Markov model. Journal of forecasting 19 (2), 81–102. Hamilton, J. D., 1989. A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and the business cycle. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 357–384. Harvey, A., 1991. Forecasting, structural time series models and the Kalman ﬁlter. Cambridge university press. Hassan, M. R., Nath, B., 2005. Stock market forecasting using hidden Markov model: a new approach. In: Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, 2005. ISDA’05. Proceedings. 5th International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 192–196. Hibbert, A. M., Daigler, R. T., Dupoyet, B., 2008. A behavioral expla- nation for the negative asymmetric return-volatility relation. Jour- nal of Banking & Finance 32 (10), 2254 – 2266. Hirsch, Y ., 1987. Don’t Sell Stocks on Monday: An Almanac for Traders, Brokers and Stock Market Investors. Penguin. Hoeting, J., Madigan, D., Raftery, A., V olinsky, C., 1999. Bayesian model averaging: A tutorial. Statistical science 14(4), 382–401. Hong, H., Stein, J. C., 1999. A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, mo- mentum trading, and overreaction in asset markets. The Journal of Finance 54 (6), 2143–2184. Huptas, R., 2009. Intraday seasonality in analysis of uhf ﬁnancial data: Models and their empirical veriﬁcation. Dynamic Economet- ric Models 9, 1–10. investopedia.com, 2016. The volatility ratio. www.investopedia. com/terms/v/volatility-ratio.asp. Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S., 1999. Proﬁtability of momentum strategies: An evaluation of alternative explanations. Tech. rep., National Bu- reau of Economic Research. Johnson, T., 2002. Rational momentum e ﬀects. Journal of Finance, 585–608. Jordan, M. I., 2009. Are you a Bayesian or a frequentist? Summer School Lecture, Cambridge. JPM, 1996. JPM RiskMetrics - technical document. Tech. rep., JPM. URL www.riskmetrics.com/system/files/private/ td4e.pdf Juang, B., Levinson, S., Sondhi, M., 1986. Maximum likelihood es- timation for multivariate mixture observations of Markov chains (corresp.). Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on 32 (2), 307– 309. Kakade, S., Teh, Y . W., Roweis, S. T., 2002. An alternate objective function for Markovian ﬁelds. In: Machine Learning International Workshop. pp. 275–282. Kalos, M. H., Whitlock, P. A., 2008. Monte Carlo methods. Wiley- VCH. Kass, R. E., Raftery, A. E., 1995. Bayes factors. Journal of the ameri- can statistical association 90 (430), 773–795. Kim, A., Shelton, C., Poggio, T., 2002. Modeling stock order ﬂows and learning market-making from data. Tech. rep., Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Kim, C.-J., 1993. Unobserved-component time series models with Markov-switching heteroscedasticity: Changes in regime and the link between inﬂation rates and inﬂation uncertainty. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 11 (3), 341–349. Kingsbury, N., Rayner, P., 1971. Digital ﬁltering using logarithmic arithmetic. Electronics Letters 7 (2), 56–58. Kinlay, J., 2006. Predicting market direction. Tech. rep., Investment Analytics LLP. Kohavi, R., et al., 1995. A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selection. In: International joint Conference on artiﬁcial intelligence. V ol. 14. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Ltd, pp. 1137–1145. Lakonishok, J., Smidt, S., 1988. Are seasonal anomalies real? a ninety-year perspective. Review of Financial Studies 1 (4), 403– 425. Lesmond, D., Schill, M., Zhou, C., 2004. The illusory nature of mo- mentum proﬁts. Journal of Financial Economics 71 (2), 349–380. Levine, R. A., Casella, G., 2006. Optimizing random scan gibbs sam- plers. Journal of multivariate analysis 97 (10), 2071–2100. Liesenfeld, R., 2001. A generalized bivariate mixture model for stock price volatility and trading volume. Journal of Econometrics 104 (1), 141–178. Lo, A., MacKinlay, A., 2001. A non-random walk down Wall Street. 21 --- [Page 22 / 23] --- Princeton University Press. Lo, A., Mamaysky, H., Wang, J., 2000. Foundations of technical anal- ysis: Computational algorithms, statistical inference, and empiri- cal implementation. Journal of Finance, 1705–1765. Lovell, M. C., 1963. Seasonal adjustment of economic time series and multiple regression analysis. Journal of the American Statistical Association 58 (304), 993–1010. Mamon, R., Elliott, R., 2007. Hidden Markov models in ﬁnance. V ol. 104. Springer Verlag. Martin-Rodriguez, G., Caceres-Hernandez, J., 2005. Modelling the hourly spanish electricity demand. Economic Modelling 22 (3), 551–569. Martín Rodríguez, G., Cáceres Hernández, J., 2010. Splines and the proportion of the seasonal period as a season index. Economic Modelling 27 (1), 83–88. MATLAB, 2009. Spline Toolbox User’s Guide 3. McCulloch, R. E., Tsay, R. S., 1994. Statistical analysis of economic time series via Markov switching models. Journal of time series analysis 15 (5), 523–539. McGrory, C. A., Titterington, D., 2009. Variational Bayesian analysis for hidden Markov models. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Statistics 51 (2), 227–244. Meligkotsidou, L., Dellaportas, P., 2011. Forecasting with non- homogeneous hidden Markov models. Statistics and Computing 21 (3), 439–449. Metropolis, N., Rosenbluth, A. W., Rosenbluth, M. N., Teller, A. H., Teller, E., 1953. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines. The journal of chemical physics 21, 1087. Murphy, J., 1987. The seasonality of risk and return on agricultural futures positions. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 69 (3), 639–646. Neal, P., Roberts, G., 2006. Optimal scaling for partially updating mcmc algorithms. The Annals of Applied Probability 16 (2), 475– 515. Oh, E. S., May 2011. Bayesian particle ﬁltering for prediction of ﬁ- nancial time series. Master’s thesis, Cambridge University. Pafka, S., Kondor, I., 2001. Evaluating the riskmetrics methodology in measuring volatility and value-at-risk in ﬁnancial markets. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 299, 305–310. Patton, A. J., 2010. V olatility forecast comparison using imperfect volatility proxies. Journal of Econometrics 160 (1), 246–256. Peiro, A., 1994. Daily seasonality in stock returns: Further interna- tional evidence. Economics Letters 45 (2), 227–232. Pesaran, B., Pesaran, M. H., 2007. V olatilities and conditional corre- lations in futures markets with a multivariate t distribution. CESifo Working Paper Series 2056, CESifo Group Munich. Pesaran, M., Schleicher, C., Za ﬀaroni, P., 2009. Model averaging in risk management with an application to futures markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 16 (2), 280–305. Pidan, D., El-yaniv, R., 2011. Selective prediction of ﬁnancial trends with hidden Markov models. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 855–863. Poon, S. H., Granger, C. W., 2003. Forecasting volatility in ﬁnancial markets: A review. Journal of Economic Literature XLI, 478–539. Punskaya, E., Andrieu, C., Doucet, A., Fitzgerald, W., 2002. Bayesian curve ﬁtting using MCMC with applications to signal segmenta- tion. Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on 50 (3), 747–758. quantshare.com, 2016. The standard de- viation ratio. www.quantshare.com/ item-1039-standard-deviation-ratio . Reinsch, C., 1967. Smoothing by spline functions. Numerical Mathe- matics 10, 177–183. Robb, A. L., 1980. Accounting for seasonality with spline functions. The Review of Economics and Statistics 62 (2), 321–323. Robert, C. P., Marin, J.-M., 2008. On some di ﬃculties with a poste- rior probability approximation technique. Bayesian Analysis 3 (2), 427–441. Robert, C. P., Ryden, T., Titterington, D. M., 2000. Bayesian inference in hidden Markov models through the reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo method. Journal of the Royal Statistical So- ciety: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 62 (1), 57–75. Roman, D., Mitra, G., Spagnolo, N., 2010. Hidden Markov models for ﬁnancial optimization problems. IMA Journal of Management Mathematics 21 (2), 111–129. Rossi, A., Gallo, G. M., 2006. V olatility estimation via hidden Markov models. Journal of Empirical Finance 13 (2), 203–230. Rydén, T., 2008. EM versus Markov chain Monte Carlo for estimation of hidden Markov models: A computational perspective. Bayesian Analysis 3 (4), 659–688. Rydén, T., Teräsvirta, T., Åsbrink, S., 1998. Stylized facts of daily return series and the hidden Markov model. Journal of applied econometrics 13 (3), 217–244. Satchell, S., Acar, E., 2002. Advanced Trading Rules. Butterworth- Heinemann. Schwager, J. D., 1995a. Fundamental Analysis (Schwager on Fu- tures). John Wiley & Sons. Schwager, J. D., 1995b. Technical Analysis (Schwager on Futures). John Wiley & Sons. Schwarz, G., 1978. Estimating the dimension of a model. The annals of statistics 6 (2), 461–464. Scott, S. L., 2002. Bayesian methods for hidden Markov models: Re- cursive computing in the 21st century. Journal of the American Statistical Association 97 (457), 337–351. Shephard, N., 1994. Partial non-gaussian state space. Biometrika 81 (1), 115–131. Shi, S., Weigend, A. S., 1997. Taking time seriously: Hidden Markov experts applied to ﬁnancial engineering. In: Computational Intel- ligence for Financial Engineering (CIFEr), 1997., Proceedings of the IEEE/IAFE 1997. IEEE, pp. 244–252. Shiller, R., 2005. Irrational exuberance. Princeton University Press. Taylor, J., 2010. Exponentially weighted methods for forecasting in- traday time series with multiple seasonal cycles. International Jour- nal of Forecasting 26 (4), 627–646. Taylor, S. J., 2007. Asset Price Dynamics, V olatility, and Prediction. Princeton University Press. Teitelbaum, R., January 2008. The code breaker. Bloomberg Maga- zine, 32–48An interview with the CEO of Renaissance Technolo- gies. Thomas, L. C., Allen, D. E., Morkel-Kingsbury, N., 2002. A hid- den Markov chain model for the term structure of bond credit risk spreads. International Review of Financial Analysis 11 (3), 311– 329. Toni, T., Welch, D., Strelkowa, N., Ipsen, A., Stumpf, M. P., 2009. Ap- proximate Bayesian computation scheme for parameter inference and model selection in dynamical systems. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 6 (31), 187–202. Vuong, Q. H., 1989. Likelihood ratio tests for model selection and non-nested hypotheses. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 307–333. Wang, H., Zhang, X., Zou, G., 2009. Frequentist model averaging estimation: a review. Journal of Systems Science and Complexity 22, 732–748. Wilmott, P., 2006. Paul Wilmott on Quantitative Finance. Wiley. Wisebourt, S., 2011. Hierarchical hidden Markov model of high- frequency market regimes using trade price and limit order book information. Master’s thesis, University of Waterloo. Yu, S.-Z., 2010. Hidden semi-Markov models. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 174 (2), 215–243. Zaﬀaroni, P., 2008. Large-scale volatility models: theoretical prop- erties of professionals’ practice. Journal of Time Series Analysis 22 --- [Page 23 / 23] --- 29 (3), 581–599. 23

================================================================================
                               END OF RAW ARCHIVE                               
================================================================================